---
title: "LF3DP Generative Design"
excerpt: "A tiered podium created with generative design methods for large format 3D printing."
header:
  image: /assets/img/gdp9.png
  teaser: /assets/img/gdp5.png
  
gallery:
  - image_path: /assets/img/gdp6.2.jpg
  - image_path: /assets/img/gdp7.2.jpg
  - image_path: /assets/img/gdp8.2.jpg
  - image_path: /assets/img/gdp1.png
  - image_path: /assets/img/gdp2.png
  - image_path: /assets/img/gdp2.5.png
  - image_path: /assets/img/gdp3.png
  - image_path: /assets/img/gdp4.png
  - image_path: /assets/img/gdp5.png

---
## Design
The base platform of the podium was first set to dimensions of 450 mm by 600 mm. This ensured that the area of the slanted surface was more than large enough to comfortably hold a laptop at 435 mm by 600 mm (approximately 17” by 24”). The base was set to 40 mm thick, and the Pattern tool was used to create two additional 40 mm shelves above the base. Finally, the top podium platform, also 40 mm thick, was created at a 15° angle and 1150 mm (about 45”) above the ground, which is a height that should be appropriate for those of average height. However, the highest part of the podium is at approximately 57”, so the podium would need to be scaled down in order to fit on the 4’x4’ build platform on the LF3DP.

Between each of the shelves, a void space designated as an obstacle geometry was created flush against the back of the podium and with a parametrized border, initially set to 75 mm, along the front and sides of the podium. This obstacle geometry ensured that no support structures would infringe upon the shelves, keeping them open and available for use as storage. In the preliminary design, a 75 mm panel on the entirety of the front of the podium was created as a preserved geometry. This had the multifunctional purpose of acting as a support structure and concealing the contents of the podium shelves from the audience.

In the generative design workspace, a 25 lb (about 805 lb force) load was added to each of the three shelves, and a 150 lb (about 1410 lb force) load was applied to the top of the podium at a 45 degree angle. These represent the potential loads the shelves can be expected to withstand and a person leaning their body weight onto the top of the podium, respectively. Gravitational force was also included as a load on the entire podium design. ABS plastic was set as the study material, and additive manufacturing was selected as the manufacturing method. The maximum overhang angle was set to 45 degrees, and the minimum feature size was set to 30 mm, as both are design constraints of the LF3DP. The print was oriented to print in the (-) y direction, such that the front of the podium acted as its base. The objective was set to minimize mass, and the minimum safety factor was set to 2.

The first podium design produced in the generative design space was projected to weigh about 115 kg of ABS filament. Because PLA is denser than ABS, the actual print would have weighed even more. In order to reduce the amount of filament used and increase the design flexibility, the front panel was removed as a preserved geometry from the bottom two thirds of the podium. The panel thickness for the top third was also reduced from 75 mm to 40 mm. Additionally, the void area obstacle geometry was removed from the bottom shelf, as it is unlikely this space would be used for storage in actuality, so that this space could now allow support structures. The generative design following these changes had a significantly reduced weight of 64 kg of ABS filament, while maintaining necessary support to withstand the prescribed loads. Plus, these changes allowed for a more visually intriguing design along the front of the panel, with a V-shaped support structure evoking the Vanderbilt logo.

Despite setting the maximum overhang angle to 45 degrees, the form created by the generative design workspace failed to meet this criteria in several places, most notably in bridging support structures across the entire bottom third of the design. These support structures were manipulated using several tools in the Modify Form workspace, including Move, Freeze/Unfreeze, Thicken, Pull, and Extrude, until the overhang angles were in compliance and bridging was minimized. At the time of writing, there remains a small section in the middle third of the podium in which the support structures exceed the 45 degree angle at a bridging distance slightly over 100 mm, but the design was able to successfully print on the MakerGear M3 FFF printer despite this. If this design were to be actually printed utilizing LF3DP, further manipulation would need to be performed to reduce the bridging distance to a greater extent.

<iframe src="https://vanderbilt643.autodesk360.com/shares/public/SH512d4QTec90decfa6e8ce9c0807e5103eb?mode=embed" width="800" height="600" allowfullscreen="true" webkitallowfullscreen="true" mozallowfullscreen="true"  frameborder="0"></iframe>

## FFF Scaled Down Model
The podium model was scaled down to 7% of its proportions and printed from PLA on the MakerGear M3 FFF printer. At this scale, there was negligible stringing or other print issues involving overhangs. Images of the scaled-down print can be seen in the gallery below.

## Applications of Large Format 3DP and Generative Design: Planetary Surface Construction
In recent years, additive manufacturing has become an increasingly popular method for large scale construction. 3D printed houses have been popping up in various locations across the country, boasting unique visual designs along with increased sustainability and affordability. Companies such as SQ4D in New York and ICON in Texas have been established to cater to a growing demand for such projects. Earlier this year, the first ever two story 3D printed house was completed in Houston, and there are plans in Dubai to open a 3D printed mosque by 2025. 

As this large scale 3D printing technology has developed on Earth, adapting this technology for outer space applications has grown in consideration in the past two decades. Beginning in the mid 2000s, the In SItu Fabrication and Repair (ISFR) project was developed at NASA’s George C. Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) to analyze the possibility of using naturally occurring lunar materials and other recycled goods (discarded machinery parts, garbage, human waste, etc.) in lunar construction projects. Dozens of research projects were developed as a part of this initiative, beginning the investigation into the fabrication of 2D and 3D structures. There is potential to create a wide variety of lunar infrastructure, including landing pads, pathways, foundational bases, shelters, equipment housing, and human habitats.

Development of such projects remained largely at the theoretical stage for the next decade or so. The most significant development began in 2014, when a team at NASA (Mueller, et al) began the Additive Construction with Mobile Emplacement (ACME) project. The goal of the project was to investigate the feasibility of the construction of additively manufactured human habitats, equipment shelters, and other infrastructure on either the Moon or Mars from resources found largely on site. Such a process would offer several benefits, including a significantly reduced cargo load on manned missions or supply runs (as construction materials would be obtained from the planetary surface), reduced raw material costing, reduced environmental impact to Earth, and simplification of mission logistics.

Although large format 3D printing in space has many potential applications, the ACME project focuses on the construction of shelters that would protect humans from a hostile environment, including extreme temperatures and pressures, radiation, extreme planetary weather events, and debris. Aspects of the proposed process were tested on Earth. First, to confirm that concrete would be a viable construction material, rock aggregates in Hawaii were successfully used in large format structural prints. Although the material composition would be different on the Moon or Mars, the material preparation process would be the same as tested on Earth: raw rock is robotically excavated and converted into a slurry through combination of other additives and particle size uniformization. The automatic robotic extruder was mounted on a 3 axis gantry. The full model setup, including the dry goods and wet goods delivery systems, gantry system, pumps, and accumulators, was assembled in Illinois and successfully used to print Army B-huts (barracks) in partnership with the United States Army Corps of Engineers (USACE). The implementation of this process resulted in reduced construction time, personnel requirements, shipped materials, waste, and logistical impact.

The addition of generative design to large format planetary surface construction would offer many benefits. Due to the constraints of space travel, including extreme conditions, limited storage space, and the high cost of transporting materials off of Earth, minimizing the amount of raw material exported to space is one of the main advantages offered by the use of in situ materials for planetary surface construction. The mass minimization feature of generative design would be helpful in optimizing this parameter. Structural designs intended to operate on other planetary surfaces would have to be designed to account for conditions vastly different than Earth; extremely low temperatures and Mars’ extreme dust storms and other weather events, for example. Additionally, basic forces accounted for in Earth-based engineering, such as the gravitational force, have different values on different planetary locations. Generative design would be able to model these conditions and forces and apply the effects to the design in such a way that design and safety criteria are met to the correct degree. Applying generative design principles to large format planetary surface construction would therefore improve the safety and optimize the economics of any design. A potential pitfall I can see with this method is the inability to correctly model the material properties of lunar and Martian rock to analyze how they may react to stress, but testing on ground samples could provide enough data to negate this issue. 

Future innovation in large format planetary surface construction, but will likely be slow going. There is a significant time delay (years) associated with the construction of outer space vehicles and semi-lengthy travel times. Additionally, the costs associated with supply runs or other trips outside Earth’s atmosphere are staggering. A deeper understanding of the material properties of lunar and Martian rock is also essential for modeling and design purposes. However, the successful modeling of the proposed process on Earth is encouraging, as is the support demonstrated by NASA over the last several decades. As 3D printed buildings become increasingly more common, additively manufactured structures will continue to be developed for applications in outer space, especially as the Artemis 2 and Artemis manned lunar missions are planned for 2024 and 2025, respectively. Applying generative design and large format 3D printing to planetary surface construction represents the opportunity for optimized economics, environmental impact, safety, and material loads, and I am confident that its impact will continue to grow in the decades to come.

## Bibliography
1. Mueller, Robert & Fikes, John & Case, Michael & Khoshnevis, B & Fiske, Michael & Edmunson, J. & Kelso, R & Romo, Rodrigo & Andersen, Christian. (2017). Additive Construction with Mobile Emplacement (ACME). 

{% include gallery caption="Large Format 3DP Gallery" %}
